[Return to the Table of Contents](https://github.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp#readme)

# The Network Playground

To help readers of *Foundations of Python Network Programming* who want
to explore client and server programming on a network where they have
complete control and can capture packets wherever they wish, I have
created 5 Docker images together with a script that configures them as a
12-machine network that roughly resembles the Internet in miniature.

  * Four hosts `h1`, `h2`, `h3`, and `h4` represent the machines you
    might use at home or in a coffee shop.

  * The hosts live behind `modemA` and `modemB` that do network address
    translation (NAT) so that only outbound connections can be made to
    the rest of the network.

  * The modems connect to the rest of the world through routers `isp`
    and `backbone`.

  * On the other side of the world is the `example.com` machine room
    whose gateway named `example` serves three machines `ftp`, `mail`,
    and `www`.  These servers can be reached either using the short
    version of their name like `ftp` or a fully qualified name like
    `ftp.example.com`.

<img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp/m/diagrams/playground.png">

The network services running on the machines are:

  * (On all hosts)
    * SSH — port 22
  * `backbone`
    * DNS — port 53
  * `ftp.example.com`
    * FTP — port 21
    * Telnet — port 23
  * `mail.example.com`
    * SMTP — port 25
    * POP3 — port 110
    * POP3S — port 995
    * IMAP — port 143
    * IMAPS — port 993
  * `www.example.com`
    * HTTP — port 80
    * HTTPS — port 443

You can verify that these ports are open by connecting to them
individually or else by running `nmap` — which is available on every
machine in the network — against one of the other hosts.

## Launching the Playground

The network playground is available as a virtual machine image, that you
can launch using a virtualization engine like the open-source and freely
available [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) tool.  (If you want
to build the playground manually with Docker, see the next section.)

You can download the latest `playground-X.Y.ova` image at:

https://github.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp/releases

Once you have downloaded the image, you can import and launch it either
from the VirtualBox window or from its command-line client:

    $ VBoxManage import ~/playground-X.Y.ova
    $ VBoxManage startvm --type headless playground-vm

Once the image is launched and has finished booting, you should be able
to log in to the network playground clients with your normal SSH client.
The ports 2201 through 2204 should connect you to the hosts `h1` through
`h4` in the diagram above.  Connect as the user `brandon` or `root` and
the password `abc123`.  The first thing you will probably want to do is
use `ssh-copy-id` so that further connections will not prompt you for a
password:

    # (This only works for me if I first run "ssh-add" locally)

    $ ssh-copy-id -p 2201 brandon@localhost
    Password: abc123

Once you have reached a prompt on a machine in the playground, you
should be able to SSH to any of the rest without a password.

    $ ssh -p 2201 brandon@localhost

    h1$ traceroute www.example.com
    traceroute to www.example.com (10.130.1.4), 30 hops max, 60 byte packets
     1  192.168.1.1 (192.168.1.1)  0.294 ms  0.167 ms  0.183 ms
     2  isp (10.25.1.1)  1.002 ms  0.220 ms  0.218 ms
     3  backbone (10.1.1.1)  0.358 ms  0.259 ms  0.256 ms
     4  example.com (10.130.1.1)  0.500 ms  0.286 ms  0.355 ms
     5  www.example.com (10.130.1.4)  0.722 ms  0.662 ms  0.475 ms

    h1$ ping -c1 www.example.com
    64 bytes from www.example.com (10.130.1.4): icmp_seq=1 ttl=60 time=1.17 ms

    h1$ ssh root@www

    www# route -n
    Kernel IP routing table
    Destination     Gateway         Genmask         Flags Metric Ref    Use Iface
    0.0.0.0         10.130.1.1      0.0.0.0         UG    0      0        0 eth0
    10.130.1.0      0.0.0.0         255.255.255.0   U     0      0        0 eth0

All of the hosts in the playground should have the *Foundations of
Python Network Programming* repository mounted under “/fopnp” and should
allow you to login as either the user `brandon` or `root`.  If you get
tired of typing the options `-p 2201 brandon@localhost` when connecting,
you can append the following stanza to your own `~/.ssh/config` file:

    Host h1
      Hostname localhost
      User brandon
      Port 2201

Now you can connect to playground machine `h1` with a simple:

    $ ssh h1

If you want to log into the outer virtual machine that is hosting all of
these Docker images, connect to port 2022 instead with the username
`docker` and the password `tcuser`:

    $ ssh -p 2022 docker@localhost
    Password: tcuser

Once logged in as `tcuser` you should be able to run `docker ps` to see
all of the running containers that make up the playground.

## Building the Playground

If you want to build the playground yourself instead of using the
pre-packaged virtual machine image:

  * Log in to an existing 64-bit Linux machine, or else install one
    inside of a vitalization tool like VirtualBox.  Install both
    [Docker](https://www.docker.com/) and the `git` version control
    command.  If instead of a general-purpose Linux like Ubuntu Server
    you use [boot2docker](https://github.com/boot2docker/boot2docker),
    then Docker will already be up and running once you boot and `git`
    will already be installed.

  * Use `git` to check out the `fopnp` repository from GitHub:

        $ git clone https://github.com/brandon-rhodes/fopnp.git
        $ cd fopnp/playground

  * Build the five Docker images.  You will need `sudo` access to the
    root account to perform this step as well as the following step.

        $ ./build.sh

  * Start the images and configure the network fabric between them.
    This script is currently designed for use on boot2docker, and might
    require adjustment before it will run under another distribution.

        $ ./launch.sh

Once the above steps are completed, you should be able to get a root
prompt on any of the machines by using the `play.sh` script.

    $ ./play.sh h1

    root@h1:/# pwd
    /

    root@h1:/# traceroute www.example.com
    traceroute to www.example.com (10.130.1.4), 30 hops max, 60 byte packets
     1  192.168.1.1 (192.168.1.1)  0.294 ms  0.167 ms  0.183 ms
     2  isp (10.25.1.1)  1.002 ms  0.220 ms  0.218 ms
     3  backbone (10.1.1.1)  0.358 ms  0.259 ms  0.256 ms
     4  example.com (10.130.1.1)  0.500 ms  0.286 ms  0.355 ms
     5  www.example.com (10.130.1.4)  0.722 ms  0.662 ms  0.475 ms
